in 1962 a new British star took to the
air polished refined with a license to
thrill it was Britain's final report to
the brash Americans it is powerful
Savile Row suited the name was VC VC 10
the vc10 was unlike nificent aircraft
there should be no question about that
it looks absolutely superb whether you
see it on film or in the Tim it's a
delight is a piece of aviation sculpture
those I'm drilling in the way it took
off like a jet fighter Rovner a
lumbering Airbus of today Vichy turn
romance in the sky adventure boys own
dander the eagle all those things a
salut thrilling the vc10 does do a very
different job to the bang it's been
designed to operate out of the short
airfield with high temperature
conditions which are so important to
large air and track BOAC on the
Commonwealth routes why was it necessary
to come into this market at all well the
big job market is a great part of the
airline scene and I think if we are to
preserve the aircraft industry which is
a great national asset it exports
perhaps 150 million pounds a year we
need to develop an aircraft like the
dc-10 the last of the all British great
jets has to be the vc10 and this was a
final report to the Americans they
brought us the 707 which for decades was
going to dominate aviation we hit back
with a plane which was much more
sophisticated in its design well the
vc10
looked wonderful it had each engine to
the back so the cabin was supremely
quiet it was fast in fact I think it's
still a world record holder for subsonic
airliner flight oh it was quick it was
comfortable and it could go for most
anywhere
it's astonishing but 50 years later only
Concorde has crossed the Atlantic faster
than our last great passenger jet
I do this trip from Nairobi Sundin every
year and this is very far the most part
most comfortable I can remember the vc10
was deeply loved by passengers and that
was a great selling point it's very
seldom you get people coming off
aircraft saying what a wonderful
aircraft that was but they really did on
the vc10 people were actually asked to
fly on it and would postpone their
flight if they couldn't I think is an
extremely comfortable playing very
smooth very quiet
the seating most comfortable plenty of
legroom
it seems to travel so serenely when you
hit turbulence it doesn't um ride
turbulence like other airliners it has a
very very stiff wing so it doesn't
juggle you about like the average
aircraft and of course the one major
advantage the aeroplane always had and
made it so successful was the fact that
the engines were on the tail
so of course consequently it's a very
quiet interior also for a nervous person
who doesn't really like flying the
aircraft could take off 2/3 quicker than
a 707 so consequently you are a thousand
feet above the runway where the 707 was
still sitting on it the vc10 was sold on
its passenger experience and part of
this was down to the cabin crew they
also preferred the aircraft to the 707
when you compared it to the 707 which I
also went on for a short period it was
the most amazing aircraft the vc10 cos
it was neat it was small it was very
fast and it was only 144 passengers but
it was the latest jet plane you know
that everyone was quite excited to fly
in the same zone was much noisier and
also the landing was wisely was
controlled crash all the time bang down
the wrong way and where's the vc10 was
very smooth it glided off and it glided
down it was very smooth I think the
passengers prefer the VC at home the
hostesses may have loved the aircraft
but were not always so keen on the
designer uniforms paper dresses we're on
this route I'm sure it's New York down
to the Caribbean yeah and you're issued
with this paper dress so in you're given
it was snowing you trot off the aircraft
we had these big raincoats Pixel
military raincoats but went with the
raincoat off you Lorraine this paper
dress they're more or less all the same
size and they did up with string at the
back so if you any had any bus to just
stuck straight out in front and they had
to be I think two or three inches above
the knee you were supposed to wear them
we were actually issued with tights and
and of course all the boys had to get
the scissors out and try and cut them
shorter and shorter
green plastic shoes of plastic jewels on
and a flower in your hair hideous
judges and those 403 VC tens and you
don't know which one you were on so you
trot up the steps and say are you going
down the Caribbean or shy and flustered
and and then and they say why and you go
like this because you poke no no it's
not that one day it's that once yet once
again Britain was making a technically
advanced aircraft to the specifications
of one company a company BOAC that was
often referred to as the Boeing only
Aircraft Corporation such was its
addiction to buying the Seattle Jets no
British aircraft could succeed without
the backing of the state Airlines and
relying on that could be a pact with the
devil
the BBC's money program interviewed
Britain's own doctor know the chairman
of BOAC he damned the vc10 with faint
praise
it's a lovely airplane to fly I've flown
it myself
I think it has one little drawback and
that is that you have to get an awful
lot of extra people in it before it
makes money it's a really sad story that
BOAC who specified the airplane turned
against it when they realized that the
707 was actually more economical to fly
the reason it was more economical to fly
was because the 707 had been built for
very long runways the vc10 had been
designed specifically for BOS ease
requirement to get out of shorter
runways at high altitude in places like
Nairobi on the Empire routes so it had a
bigger wing with high-lift devices and
the tail mounted engines this made it
heavier and therefore learned a bit more
fuel
so BOAC actually tried to get out of
part of their vc10 order in order to buy
more 707s which didn't really help its
image with the rest of the world when
you're trying to sell it to other
Airlines the airline corporations were
more or less strong-armed into buying
British they had probably an excessive
influence on the design of the aircraft
because they were tailored for Vioxx
needs bas needs without looking at the
wider world as a market so the aircraft
were too closely tailored and then
inevitably mines changed
commerce developed
the airline's didn't then really quite
want what they'd said they wanted and in
the end airlines tend to go for
operating costs and reliability rather
than the last bit of perfection the
American 707 went on to sell over a
thousand the British vc10 a mere 54 a
proud line of all British big Jets to
challenge the Americans had come to an
end